Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
the pulmonary circulation and the non-respiratory functions of the lung.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Describe the special features of the pulmonary circulation compared with the
systemic.
The pulmonary circulation, carrying the whole cardiac output through the lungs for
gas exchange, differs from the systemic circulation in ways suited to that role,
the chief difference being that it is a low-pressure, low-resistance system.
Whereas the systemic circulation is a high-pressure system,
the pulmonary arterial pressure is low — a mean of around fifteen millimetres of
mercury, about a fifth of the systemic — generated by the thin-walled right
ventricle, and the pulmonary vascular resistance is correspondingly low.
The pulmonary vessels are thin-walled and distensible,
with little resting smooth muscle tone,
and the circulation accommodates the entire cardiac output yet can accept large
increases in flow, as in exercise, with little rise in pressure,
because it recruits and distends vessels — lowering resistance as flow rises.
The low pressure keeps the capillaries relatively dry, important for gas exchange.
The pulmonary circulation is also uniquely exposed to alveolar pressure and gas,
and responds to hypoxia by vasoconstriction, opposite to the systemic response.
So the pulmonary circulation is a low-pressure, low-resistance,
distensible system carrying the whole cardiac output at about a fifth of systemic
pressure, able to accept large flow increases by recruitment and distension with
little pressure rise, kept relatively dry for exchange,
and constricting rather than dilating in response to hypoxia — features adapted to
its role in gas exchange.
How does pulmonary vascular resistance vary, and what is the effect of lung volume?
Pulmonary vascular resistance is low and, unusually,
falls as the flow or pressure rises,
and it is also strongly affected by the lung volume — behaviours important in
health and disease.
As the pulmonary arterial pressure or flow rises, the resistance falls,
by two mechanisms: recruitment, the opening of previously closed capillaries,
and distension, the widening of already open ones;
this allows the lung to accept increased flow with little rise in pressure.
The effect of lung volume is distinctive because the pulmonary vessels are of two
kinds affected oppositely: the alveolar vessels, in the alveolar walls,
are compressed as the lung inflates and the alveoli enlarge,
so their resistance rises with lung volume;
the extra-alveolar vessels are held open by the radial traction of the expanding
lung, so their resistance falls as lung volume rises.
Because these opposite effects predominate at different volumes,
the total pulmonary vascular resistance is lowest near the functional residual
capacity and rises at both high and low lung volumes — a U-shaped relationship.
So pulmonary vascular resistance is low and falls as pressure or flow rises,
through recruitment and distension;
and it varies with lung volume in a U-shaped manner — lowest near the functional
residual capacity, rising at high volumes as alveolar vessels are compressed and at
low volumes as extra-alveolar vessels narrow — behaviours relevant to ventilation
and to pulmonary hypertension.
Describe the distribution of pulmonary blood flow and the zones of the lung.
The distribution of blood flow in the upright lung is uneven,
increasing greatly from apex to base under the influence of gravity,
and this is classically described in terms of the West zones,
defined by the relationships between three pressures — the alveolar,
the pulmonary arterial and the pulmonary venous pressures.
Because the pulmonary arterial pressure is low, gravity has a large effect,
adding hydrostatic pressure down the lung.
In zone one, at the apex, if the alveolar pressure exceeds the arterial pressure,
the capillaries are compressed and there is no flow — ventilated but unperfused,
alveolar dead space; this does not normally occur but appears if arterial pressure
falls or alveolar pressure rises.
In zone two, the middle, the arterial pressure exceeds the alveolar,
but the alveolar exceeds the venous,
so flow depends on the arterial-minus-alveolar pressure difference,
increasing down the zone.
In zone three, at the base, both arterial and venous pressures exceed the alveolar,
so flow is governed by the normal arterial-venous difference and is high.
So pulmonary blood flow increases from apex to base by gravity,
described by the West zones: zone one at the apex,
where alveolar pressure may exceed arterial, giving no flow; zone two,
where flow depends on the arterial-alveolar difference; and zone three at the base,
where flow is governed by the arterial-venous difference — a distribution important
to ventilation-perfusion matching and altered by posture, pressure and ventilation.
Describe the formation of pulmonary oedema and how the lung is kept dry.
Keeping the alveoli free of fluid is essential for gas exchange,
and the lung has features that keep it dry,
the failure of which causes pulmonary oedema.
The fluid balance across the pulmonary capillaries follows the Starling forces,
but the pulmonary circulation is adapted to favour keeping the lung dry:
the pulmonary capillary hydrostatic pressure is low,
because the pulmonary circulation is a low-pressure system,
so the outward filtration force is small;
and any fluid that does filter into the interstitium is efficiently removed by the
pulmonary lymphatics, and tends to collect in the interstitial space around the
vessels rather than flooding the alveoli,
kept out of the alveoli by the epithelial barrier and by surfactant.
Pulmonary oedema results when these defences are overwhelmed:
most commonly when the capillary hydrostatic pressure rises,
as in left heart failure or fluid overload — cardiogenic, or hydrostatic, oedema;
or when the capillary permeability increases,
as in the acute respiratory distress syndrome — increased-permeability oedema.
So the lung is kept dry by a low capillary hydrostatic pressure,
efficient lymphatic drainage, and the epithelial barrier with surfactant confining
fluid to the interstitium; pulmonary oedema occurs when these are overwhelmed by a
raised hydrostatic pressure, as in heart failure, or by increased permeability,
as in lung injury — impairing gas exchange and of major clinical importance.
Describe the metabolic and other non-respiratory functions of the lung.
Besides gas exchange, the lung performs a range of non-respiratory functions,
some metabolic and endocrine, that are easily overlooked,
and several are relevant to anaesthesia.
The lung is a metabolic and endocrine organ:
its endothelium is the site of conversion of angiotensin one to the active
angiotensin two, by the angiotensin-converting enzyme,
and it inactivates or removes a number of circulating vasoactive substances — such
as bradykinin, serotonin and some prostaglandins — while allowing others to pass;
it thus processes the entire venous return before it reaches the systemic
circulation.
It is involved in the synthesis and storage of surfactant and other substances.
The lung has important defensive functions:
the mucociliary escalator and cough clear inhaled particles,
alveolar macrophages remove debris and microbes,
and the airway secretions and lymphoid tissue contribute to immune defence;
it also warms, humidifies and filters the inspired air.
The pulmonary circulation acts as a filter and a reservoir of blood,
and traps small emboli.
So the lung's non-respiratory functions include its metabolic and endocrine role —
activating angiotensin and inactivating vasoactive substances;
defence — the mucociliary escalator, cough, macrophages and immune tissue;
the conditioning of inspired air; and its role as a blood reservoir and filter —
functions beyond gas exchange of physiological and anaesthetic importance.
Describe the pulmonary defence mechanisms in more detail.
The respiratory tract, continuously exposed to the inhaled environment,
is protected by a series of defence mechanisms operating along its length,
important because their impairment predisposes to infection,
a concern in anaesthesia.
The first defences condition and filter the air: the nose warms,
humidifies and filters it, removing larger particles.
In the conducting airways, the mucociliary escalator is the principal mechanism:
the airway is lined by ciliated epithelium covered by a mucus layer,
which traps inhaled particles, and the coordinated beating of the cilia propels the
mucus, with its trapped particles, upward towards the pharynx to be swallowed or
expectorated.
The cough reflex provides a powerful mechanism to expel material from the larger
airways. In the alveoli, beyond the reach of the escalator,
the alveolar macrophages phagocytose particles and microbes.
Specific and innate immune mechanisms — antibodies,
and lymphoid tissue — add further protection.
Many of these are impaired by anaesthesia, intubation, dry gases and smoking.
So the lung is defended by the conditioning and filtering of air in the nose,
the mucociliary escalator clearing trapped particles from the conducting airways,
the cough reflex, the alveolar macrophages in the alveoli,
and immune mechanisms — a layered defence whose impairment by anaesthesia,
intubation and smoking predisposes to respiratory infection.
What is the relevance of the pulmonary circulation to anaesthesia?
The pulmonary circulation is relevant to anaesthesia in several ways,
through its effect on gas exchange, its response to our interventions,
and the conditions affecting it.
Its low pressure and the gravitational distribution of flow underlie the matching
of ventilation and perfusion and its disturbance by posture,
positive-pressure ventilation — which can create zone-one conditions and increase
dead space — and hypotension.
Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
governing the diversion of flow from poorly ventilated lung,
is central to one-lung ventilation and is inhibited by volatile agents.
The lung's role in keeping itself dry, and the development of pulmonary oedema,
are important in fluid management and in the recognition of cardiogenic and
permeability oedema. Pulmonary hypertension and right heart failure pose major
anaesthetic challenges.
And the lung's metabolic handling of drugs and vasoactive substances,
and its filtering of emboli, are relevant.
So the pulmonary circulation is relevant to anaesthesia through the gravitational
distribution of flow and its disturbance by ventilation and posture,
hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in one-lung ventilation,
the development of pulmonary oedema, the challenge of pulmonary hypertension,
and the lung's metabolic and filtering roles — a circulation whose physiology
underlies much of respiratory anaesthetic care.
Pull it together: how is the pulmonary circulation adapted to its role?
I would draw it together around the pulmonary circulation as a system adapted to
pass the whole cardiac output through the lung for gas exchange while keeping the
lung dry and matching perfusion to ventilation.
It is a low-pressure, low-resistance, distensible system,
generated by the thin-walled right ventricle,
which accommodates the entire cardiac output and accepts large increases in flow,
as in exercise, with little rise in pressure, by recruitment and distension.
Its low pressure, with efficient lymphatic drainage and the epithelial barrier,
keeps the alveoli dry for exchange.
Its distribution of flow, gravitationally uneven and described by the West zones,
together with the parallel distribution of ventilation,
achieves a reasonable matching of ventilation and perfusion,
refined by hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
which diverts flow from poorly ventilated regions.
Beyond perfusion, it serves metabolic, endocrine, defensive and filtering functions.
So the pulmonary circulation is adapted by its low pressure and distensibility to
carry the whole output at little pressure cost while staying dry,
by its gravitational distribution and hypoxic vasoconstriction to match perfusion
to ventilation, and by its endothelium to perform metabolic and filtering roles —
an integrated adaptation to gas exchange,
central to respiratory physiology and anaesthesia.
Describe pulmonary hypertension and its consequences for the right heart.
Pulmonary hypertension is a sustained elevation of the pulmonary arterial pressure
above normal, and because the right ventricle is thin-walled and adapted to a
low-pressure circulation, it has serious consequences for the right heart,
of major importance in anaesthesia.
It arises by several mechanisms, conveniently grouped:
an increased pulmonary vascular resistance — from hypoxic vasoconstriction in
chronic lung disease, from vascular obstruction as in chronic thromboembolism,
or from the vascular disease of idiopathic pulmonary arterial hypertension;
an increased pulmonary blood flow, as in some congenital shunts;
or a raised downstream pressure from left heart disease.
Whatever the cause, the right ventricle must generate a higher pressure,
and being unsuited to this, it initially hypertrophies but eventually dilates and
fails — right heart failure, or cor pulmonale — with a falling output and systemic
venous congestion.
The failing, pressure-loaded right ventricle is critically dependent on its
coronary perfusion and on adequate filling,
and is poorly tolerant of further rises in pulmonary resistance from hypoxia,
hypercapnia, acidosis or high airway pressures.
So pulmonary hypertension, from raised resistance,
increased flow or raised left-heart pressure,
loads the thin-walled right ventricle, which hypertrophies then dilates and fails;
the failing right ventricle being intolerant of factors raising pulmonary
resistance — a condition posing major anaesthetic risk and demanding the avoidance
of hypoxia, hypercapnia and acidosis.
Describe the bronchial circulation and how it differs from the pulmonary
circulation.
The lung has a dual blood supply, and it is important to distinguish the pulmonary
circulation, which serves gas exchange, from the bronchial circulation,
which nourishes the lung tissue itself.
The pulmonary circulation, carrying the whole cardiac output,
is the functional circulation of the lung:
deoxygenated blood from the right heart passing through the alveolar capillaries
for gas exchange and returning oxygenated to the left heart.
The bronchial circulation, by contrast, is the nutritive circulation:
it arises from the systemic arterial system, as bronchial arteries from the aorta,
and carries oxygenated systemic blood at systemic pressure to supply the tissues of
the airways and supporting structures down to the terminal bronchioles,
which are not nourished by the alveolar gas.
It is a tiny fraction of the cardiac output.
A point of interest is that some of the bronchial venous blood drains into the
pulmonary veins, returning deoxygenated blood to the left heart and constituting
part of the small physiological shunt of the normal lung.
So the lung has a dual supply: the pulmonary circulation,
the whole cardiac output for gas exchange, and the bronchial circulation,
a small systemic supply nourishing the lung tissue itself;
part of the bronchial venous drainage entering the pulmonary veins as a normal
physiological shunt — a distinction between the functional and nutritive
circulations of the lung.
Describe the fetal pulmonary circulation and its changes at birth.
Before birth the lungs are not used for gas exchange, which occurs at the placenta,
so the fetal pulmonary circulation is adapted to divert blood away from the
unventilated lungs, and the dramatic changes at birth establish the adult pattern —
a transition of great importance.
In the fetus, the lungs are fluid-filled and collapsed,
and the pulmonary vascular resistance is very high,
partly through hypoxic vasoconstriction in the unventilated lungs;
so most of the right heart's output bypasses the lungs,
shunting from right to left through the foramen ovale, between the atria,
and through the ductus arteriosus, from the pulmonary artery to the aorta.
At birth, the first breaths expand the lungs with air,
and the rise in alveolar oxygen, with the lung expansion,
causes a dramatic fall in pulmonary vascular resistance,
so pulmonary blood flow increases greatly;
meanwhile the clamping of the cord raises the systemic resistance.
These pressure changes close the foramen ovale,
and the rising oxygen causes the ductus arteriosus to constrict and close,
separating the two circulations.
So the fetal pulmonary circulation has a high resistance that diverts blood from
the unventilated lungs through the foramen ovale and ductus arteriosus; at birth,
lung expansion and the rise in oxygen sharply reduce pulmonary resistance,
increasing pulmonary flow and closing these shunts — establishing the adult
circulation, a transition that may fail or reverse in the newborn.
Describe the effects of positive-pressure ventilation on the pulmonary circulation
and the heart.
Positive-pressure ventilation, by reversing the normal negative intrathoracic
pressure, has important effects on the pulmonary circulation and the heart,
which the anaesthetist must understand because they can compromise the circulation.
By raising the intrathoracic and alveolar pressure, positive-pressure ventilation,
especially with positive end-expiratory pressure, has several effects.
It impedes the venous return to the right heart,
because the raised intrathoracic pressure opposes the filling of the thin-walled
right atrium and ventricle, reducing preload and so cardiac output — the principal
mechanism by which it can lower the blood pressure,
especially in the hypovolaemic patient.
It affects the pulmonary vascular resistance through its effect on lung volume:
inflating the lung compresses the alveolar vessels,
and over-inflation raises pulmonary vascular resistance,
increasing right ventricular afterload,
which the failing right heart tolerates poorly.
It can create zone-one conditions at the apex, increasing alveolar dead space.
So positive-pressure ventilation raises intrathoracic pressure,
impeding venous return and reducing preload and cardiac output — especially if
hypovolaemic; and, by raising lung volume,
can increase pulmonary vascular resistance and right ventricular afterload and
create dead space — effects requiring attention to filling and to ventilator
settings, particularly in the compromised circulation.
Describe the role of nitric oxide in the pulmonary circulation.
Nitric oxide is an important regulator of pulmonary vascular tone,
and its understanding has both physiological and therapeutic significance in the
lung.
As in the systemic circulation, nitric oxide is produced by the pulmonary vascular
endothelium and acts on the underlying smooth muscle,
through cyclic guanosine monophosphate, to cause vasodilatation,
contributing to the maintenance of the normally low pulmonary vascular tone and
opposing vasoconstriction.
Therapeutically, nitric oxide can be administered by inhalation,
and this has an elegant property: being a gas,
inhaled nitric oxide reaches only the ventilated alveoli,
where it diffuses to the adjacent vessels and dilates them;
so it selectively increases blood flow to ventilated regions,
improving ventilation-perfusion matching and oxygenation,
and it lowers the pulmonary arterial pressure without causing systemic hypotension,
because it is rapidly inactivated by haemoglobin once it reaches the blood.
It is used in pulmonary hypertension and in severe hypoxaemic respiratory failure.
So nitric oxide, produced by the pulmonary endothelium,
maintains the low pulmonary vascular tone by vasodilatation; given by inhalation,
it selectively dilates the vessels of ventilated lung,
improving matching and lowering pulmonary pressure without systemic effect,
being inactivated by haemoglobin — a physiological regulator and a selective
pulmonary vasodilator therapy.
Describe the pathophysiology of the acute respiratory distress syndrome.
The acute respiratory distress syndrome is a severe form of acute hypoxaemic
respiratory failure arising from diffuse injury to the alveolar-capillary unit,
and its pathophysiology draws together much of the respiratory physiology we have
discussed.
It is triggered by a variety of insults, pulmonary or systemic — such as sepsis,
aspiration, trauma or pancreatitis — which provoke a widespread inflammatory injury
to the alveolar epithelium and the capillary endothelium.
The increased permeability of the injured barrier allows protein-rich fluid to
flood the interstitium and alveoli — a non-cardiogenic,
increased-permeability pulmonary oedema — and the injury impairs surfactant,
so the alveoli collapse.
The consequences are a stiff, poorly compliant lung;
widespread collapse and flooding creating a large shunt with severe,
oxygen-resistant hypoxaemia; and an increased dead space.
Management is supportive, with lung-protective ventilation — small tidal volumes
and limited pressures, accepting permissive hypercapnia — positive end-expiratory
pressure to recruit collapsed lung, and measures such as prone positioning.
So the acute respiratory distress syndrome is a diffuse inflammatory injury to the
alveolar-capillary unit, causing increased-permeability oedema,
surfactant impairment and collapse, with a stiff lung,
a large shunt and severe hypoxaemia; managed by lung-protective ventilation,
positive end-expiratory pressure and prone positioning — a condition embodying the
disturbance of compliance, gas exchange and the pulmonary circulation.
Describe the effect of hypoxia, hypercapnia and acidosis on the pulmonary
vasculature.
The pulmonary vasculature responds to the blood and alveolar gases in ways largely
opposite to the systemic circulation,
and these responses are important in disease and in anaesthesia.
Hypoxia is the most important: a low alveolar oxygen tension causes pulmonary
vasoconstriction — hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction — the opposite of the
systemic vasodilator response to hypoxia;
locally this improves ventilation-perfusion matching, but globally,
as at altitude or in chronic lung disease,
it raises the pulmonary arterial pressure and loads the right heart.
Hypercapnia and acidosis also cause pulmonary vasoconstriction and potentiate the
hypoxic response, so a raised carbon dioxide and a low pH both raise pulmonary
vascular resistance. Conversely, a high oxygen,
hypocapnia and alkalosis tend to reduce pulmonary vascular resistance.
These responses mean that, in a patient with pulmonary hypertension or right heart
strain, hypoxia, hypercapnia and acidosis are dangerous because they further raise
the pulmonary resistance, so the anaesthetist scrupulously avoids them.
So the pulmonary vasculature constricts in response to hypoxia — hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction — and also to hypercapnia and acidosis, which potentiate it,
raising pulmonary vascular resistance; while oxygen,
hypocapnia and alkalosis lower it — responses opposite to the systemic circulation,
making the avoidance of hypoxia, hypercapnia and acidosis essential in the patient
with a compromised right heart.
Summarise the integration of ventilation, perfusion and gas exchange in the lung.
I would draw the respiratory module together around the lung as an integrated organ
in which ventilation, perfusion and diffusion are brought together to achieve gas
exchange, and in which each must be matched to the others.
Ventilation delivers fresh gas to the alveoli,
its mechanics governed by the elastic and resistive properties of the lung and
chest wall, and distributed unevenly by gravity and time constants.
Perfusion brings the whole cardiac output through the low-pressure,
distensible pulmonary circulation, also distributed unevenly by gravity,
in the West zones. Gas exchange occurs by diffusion across the thin,
vast blood-gas barrier, normally rapid and in reserve.
The efficiency of the whole depends above all on the matching of ventilation and
perfusion, optimised by the parallel gravitational distributions and by hypoxic
pulmonary vasoconstriction, and quantified by the alveolar-arterial difference.
Anaesthesia disturbs every element,
chiefly by reducing lung volume and causing atelectasis and shunt.
So the lung integrates ventilation — mechanically driven and distributed —
perfusion — through the low-pressure pulmonary circulation,
similarly distributed — and diffusion across the blood-gas barrier,
the efficiency of gas exchange depending on their matching,
optimised by gravity and hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction;
an integration that anaesthesia disturbs,
making its understanding fundamental to maintaining oxygenation and ventilation.
Describe the physiological effects of a pulmonary embolism.
A pulmonary embolism is the obstruction of part of the pulmonary arterial
circulation, usually by a thrombus from the systemic veins,
and its physiological effects follow from the sudden creation of lung that is
ventilated but not perfused, and from the obstruction to right ventricular outflow.
The immediate effect on gas exchange is an increase in alveolar dead space:
the embolised region is ventilated but no longer perfused — a ventilation-perfusion
ratio of infinity — so its ventilation is wasted,
and the arterial-to-end-tidal carbon dioxide gradient widens.
Hypoxaemia commonly develops, from the redistribution of blood flow to other
regions causing low-ratio units and from a fall in cardiac output and mixed venous
oxygen.
The obstruction raises the pulmonary vascular resistance,
both mechanically and through the release of vasoconstrictor mediators,
increasing the afterload on the right ventricle;
a large embolism can acutely overload the thin-walled right ventricle,
causing it to fail and dilate, which impairs left ventricular filling and causes a
fall in cardiac output and systemic hypotension — obstructive shock.
There may also be bronchoconstriction and loss of surfactant.
So a pulmonary embolism creates ventilated-but-unperfused lung,
increasing alveolar dead space and widening the arterial-to-end-tidal carbon
dioxide gradient, with hypoxaemia; and raises pulmonary vascular resistance and
right ventricular afterload, which a large embolism may not tolerate,
causing right heart failure and obstructive shock — a combination of gas-exchange
and haemodynamic effects.
Describe the right ventricle and its coupling to the pulmonary circulation.
The right ventricle is structurally and functionally adapted to pump the cardiac
output through the low-pressure pulmonary circulation,
and the matching of its function to the pulmonary vascular load — right
ventricular-pulmonary arterial coupling — is important to understanding right heart
failure.
Unlike the thick-walled, conical left ventricle, which generates high pressures,
the right ventricle is a thin-walled,
crescent-shaped chamber that wraps around the septum and ejects its blood with a
peristaltic, bellows-like motion at low pressure;
it is well suited to pumping a large volume against a low resistance,
but poorly suited to generating high pressures.
The concept of coupling describes the relationship between the contractility of the
right ventricle and the load imposed by the pulmonary circulation:
in health they are well matched, the right ventricle ejecting efficiently against
the low pulmonary impedance.
When the pulmonary vascular load rises — acutely, as in a large embolism,
or chronically, as in pulmonary hypertension — the right ventricle is poorly
equipped to compensate; it can hypertrophy over time,
but an acute rise causes it to dilate and fail, with uncoupling.
So the right ventricle is a thin-walled,
low-pressure pump adapted to the low-resistance pulmonary circulation,
normally well coupled to it; it tolerates a rise in pulmonary load poorly,
dilating and failing when the load rises acutely and hypertrophying then failing
when it rises chronically — the uncoupling of the right ventricle from the
pulmonary circulation being the basis of right heart failure.
Describe the recruitment of the pulmonary circulation during exercise.
During exercise the cardiac output may rise several-fold,
and the pulmonary circulation must accommodate this greatly increased flow,
which it does with only a modest rise in pulmonary arterial pressure,
through the mechanisms of recruitment and distension — a striking example of the
pulmonary circulation's adaptability.
At rest, much of the pulmonary capillary bed, particularly in the upper,
less-perfused regions of the lung, is unperfused or underperfused,
providing a large reserve.
As the cardiac output rises in exercise and the pulmonary arterial pressure rises
slightly, two things happen: previously closed or underperfused capillaries are
opened up and perfused — recruitment — and already-open vessels widen — distension.
Both reduce the pulmonary vascular resistance,
so that the large increase in flow is accommodated with only a small rise in
pressure, keeping the work of the right ventricle and the risk of pulmonary oedema
in check.
The recruitment also increases the surface area and the volume of blood available
for gas exchange, and reduces the velocity,
helping to maintain the equilibration of oxygen even at the high flows of exercise.
So during exercise the pulmonary circulation accommodates the increased cardiac
output by recruiting unperfused capillaries and distending open vessels,
lowering pulmonary vascular resistance so that flow rises with little rise in
pressure; this also expands the surface for gas exchange and helps maintain
oxygenation at high flow — an adaptation central to the pulmonary response to
exercise.
Describe the effects of altitude on the pulmonary circulation.
Altitude, through the hypoxia of the reduced barometric pressure,
has marked effects on the pulmonary circulation,
principally through hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
which becomes global and can have pathological consequences.
At altitude, the low alveolar oxygen tension affects the whole lung,
so hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction occurs throughout, rather than locally;
the generalised constriction raises the pulmonary vascular resistance and the
pulmonary arterial pressure, imposing a sustained load on the right ventricle.
With prolonged residence at altitude, this can lead to pulmonary hypertension and,
over time, right ventricular hypertrophy and strain.
A particular acute hazard is high-altitude pulmonary oedema,
a form of non-cardiogenic pulmonary oedema occurring in some individuals on rapid
ascent: the mechanism is thought to involve uneven,
intense hypoxic vasoconstriction, which overperfuses the unconstricted regions at
high pressure, damaging their capillaries — a stress failure — and causing a leak
of fluid and protein into the alveoli.
It is treated by descent, oxygen, and pulmonary vasodilators.
So altitude causes global hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction,
raising pulmonary vascular resistance and pressure and loading the right ventricle,
leading with time to pulmonary hypertension;
and may cause high-altitude pulmonary oedema through uneven vasoconstriction and
capillary stress failure — effects illustrating the pulmonary circulation's
response to hypoxia and its pathological extremes.
Describe the concept of pulmonary capillary stress failure.
Pulmonary capillary stress failure is the disruption of the very thin blood-gas
barrier when the pulmonary capillary pressure or the wall stress becomes
excessively high, and it is an important mechanism of injury that reflects the
trade-off inherent in the design of the barrier.
The blood-gas barrier must be extremely thin to allow rapid diffusion,
yet it must also withstand the mechanical stresses of the capillary pressure and of
lung inflation.
Normally the pulmonary capillary pressure is low, and the barrier is safe;
but if the capillary pressure rises to high levels — as in severe left heart
failure, or when uneven hypoxic vasoconstriction at altitude overperfuses some
regions, or with very high lung inflation — the wall stress in the thin barrier may
exceed its strength, and it fails structurally:
the endothelium and epithelium are disrupted,
allowing red cells and protein-rich fluid to leak into the alveoli.
This causes a high-pressure or high-stress pulmonary oedema,
sometimes with frank haemorrhage, as in some athletes and racehorses at extreme
exertion, and in high-altitude pulmonary oedema.
So pulmonary capillary stress failure is the structural disruption of the thin
blood-gas barrier when capillary pressure or wall stress becomes excessive — in
severe heart failure, at altitude, or with extreme exertion or inflation — causing
a leak of fluid, protein and even blood into the alveoli;
an injury reflecting the inevitable tension between the thinness needed for gas
exchange and the strength needed to bear stress.
Describe the lymphatic drainage of the lung and its role.
The lungs have an extensive lymphatic system that plays an important role in
keeping the lung dry and in its defence,
and its capacity and its limits are central to the development of pulmonary oedema.
The pulmonary lymphatics form a network that begins in the interstitial spaces
around the small airways and vessels and the interlobular septa — though not in the
alveolar walls themselves — and drains centripetally towards the hilum and thence
to the systemic veins.
Their principal role in fluid balance is to remove the fluid that continuously
filters out of the pulmonary capillaries into the interstitium;
by draining this fluid away, they keep the interstitium and the alveoli dry,
an essential condition for gas exchange.
This drainage has a considerable reserve,
able to increase its flow several-fold when filtration rises;
so a gradual rise in capillary pressure may be accommodated for a time without
oedema.
Pulmonary oedema develops when the rate of filtration exceeds this lymphatic
capacity, fluid then accumulating first in the interstitium and then flooding the
alveoli. The lymphatics also carry away particles and have a role in immune defence.
So the pulmonary lymphatics drain the fluid filtered from the capillaries out of
the interstitium, keeping the lung dry,
with a several-fold reserve that delays oedema;
oedema developing when filtration exceeds this capacity — the lymphatic drainage
being a key, if finite, defence against pulmonary oedema,
as well as a route of immune defence.
Describe the handling of drugs and vasoactive substances by the lung.
Because the lung receives the entire cardiac output,
its endothelium is uniquely placed to process the whole circulation,
and it performs important metabolic handling of endogenous vasoactive substances
and of many drugs — a first-pass effect of the lung relevant to pharmacology.
The pulmonary endothelium selectively processes circulating substances:
it activates some, most notably converting angiotensin one to the vasoconstrictor
angiotensin two by the angiotensin-converting enzyme on its surface;
and it inactivates or removes others as they pass through,
including a large proportion of circulating noradrenaline, serotonin,
bradykinin and certain prostaglandins, while leaving adrenaline,
histamine and other prostaglandins largely untouched.
In addition, the lung takes up and may metabolise a number of administered drugs as
they pass through it after intravenous injection — a pulmonary first-pass uptake
that can buffer the arterial concentration of some agents,
including certain opioids and local anaesthetics and some basic lipophilic drugs,
which are taken up and then released.
This uptake influences the dynamics of drug concentration and can be saturated.
So the lung, receiving the whole cardiac output, processes the circulation:
activating angiotensin by its converting enzyme, inactivating noradrenaline,
serotonin, bradykinin and some prostaglandins,
and taking up and metabolising certain administered drugs in a first-pass manner —
metabolic and pharmacological functions of importance beyond gas exchange.
Describe the pharmacological agents used to dilate the pulmonary circulation.
Pulmonary vasodilator drugs are used to lower the pulmonary vascular resistance in
pulmonary hypertension and right heart strain,
and they act through the physiological pathways controlling pulmonary vascular
tone, the challenge being to dilate the pulmonary circulation selectively without
causing systemic hypotension.
Several pathways are exploited.
The nitric oxide pathway: inhaled nitric oxide, as discussed,
selectively dilates the vessels of ventilated lung and is rapidly inactivated by
haemoglobin, avoiding systemic effect; and the phosphodiesterase inhibitors,
such as sildenafil, prolong the action of cyclic guanosine monophosphate,
the second messenger of nitric oxide, enhancing pulmonary vasodilatation.
The prostacyclin pathway: prostacyclin and its analogues,
given by infusion or inhalation, are potent vasodilators acting through cyclic
adenosine monophosphate. The endothelin pathway:
endothelin-receptor antagonists block the action of the potent vasoconstrictor
endothelin.
Oxygen itself is a pulmonary vasodilator, relieving hypoxic vasoconstriction.
The selectivity for the pulmonary circulation is achieved by inhaled
administration, reaching ventilated lung,
or by agents with relative pulmonary selectivity.
So pulmonary vasodilators act through the nitric oxide pathway — inhaled nitric
oxide and phosphodiesterase inhibitors — the prostacyclin pathway,
and endothelin-receptor antagonists,
with oxygen relieving hypoxic vasoconstriction;
the aim being selective pulmonary vasodilatation without systemic hypotension,
achieved by inhalation or pulmonary-selective agents — a pharmacology following the
physiology of pulmonary vascular tone.
Thank you. An excellent and complete account. That concludes the station.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The pulmonary circulation is a low-pressure (mean ~15 mmHg, ~1/5 systemic),
low-resistance, distensible system from the thin-walled right ventricle,
carrying the whole cardiac output and accepting large flow increases with little
pressure rise (by recruitment and distension), kept relatively dry for exchange,
and constricting (not dilating) to hypoxia.
Second, Pulmonary vascular resistance is low and falls as pressure/flow rise
(recruitment and distension); it varies with lung volume in a U-shape — lowest near
FRC, rising at high volumes (alveolar vessels compressed) and low volumes
(extra-alveolar vessels narrow). 3.
Pulmonary blood flow increases apex-to-base by gravity (West zones): zone 1 (apex,
alveolar > arterial → no flow, alveolar dead space, not normally present),
zone 2 (flow depends on arterial − alveolar), zone 3 (base,
governed by arterial − venous, high flow) — altered by posture,
pressure and positive-pressure ventilation.
Third, The lung is kept dry by low capillary hydrostatic pressure,
efficient lymphatics, and the epithelial barrier/surfactant confining fluid to the
interstitium; pulmonary oedema occurs with raised hydrostatic pressure
(cardiogenic, e.g.
heart failure/overload) or increased permeability (e.g. ARDS).
Fourth, Non-respiratory functions: metabolic/endocrine (activates angiotensin via
ACE, inactivates bradykinin/serotonin/some prostaglandins),
defence (mucociliary escalator, cough, alveolar macrophages, immune tissue),
conditioning of inspired air, and a blood reservoir/filter — many defences impaired
by anaesthesia, intubation, dry gases and smoking.
Thank you. That concludes the station.